+++
title = "Other Languages"
weight = 840
description = "protoc, the Protocol Buffers Compiler, can be extended to support new languages via plugins."
type = "docs"
+++

While the current release includes compilers and APIs for C++, Java, Go, Ruby,
C\#, and Python, the compiler code is designed so that it's easy to add support
for other languages. There are several ongoing projects to add new language
implementations to Protocol Buffers, including C, Haskell, Perl, Rust, and more.

For a list of links to projects we know about, see the
[third-party add-ons wiki page](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/main/docs/third_party.md).

## Compiler Plugins {#plugins}

`protoc`, the Protocol Buffers Compiler, can be extended to support new
languages via plugins. A plugin is just a program which reads a
`CodeGeneratorRequest` protocol buffer from standard input and then writes a
`CodeGeneratorResponse` protocol buffer to standard output. These message types
are defined in
[`plugin.proto`](/reference/cpp/api-docs/google.protobuf.compiler.plugin.pb).
We recommend that all third-party code generators be written as plugins, as this
allows all generators to provide a consistent interface and share a single
parser implementation.

Plugins can be written in any programming language, but Google owned plugins are
written in C++. If you are writing your own plugin you may find it easiest to
use C++ for the plugin to be able to follow those examples and reuse utilities.

Additionally, plugins are able to insert code into the files generated by other
code generators. See the comments about \"insertion points\" in `plugin.proto`
for more on this. This could be used, for example, to write a plugin which
generates RPC service code that is tailored for a particular RPC system. See the
documentation for the generated code in each language to find out what insertion
points they provide.
