+++
title = "Kotlin Generated Code Guide"
weight = 680
linkTitle = "Generated Code Guide"
description = "Describes exactly what Kotlin code the protocol buffer compiler generates for any given protocol definition, in addition to the code generated for Java."
type = "docs"
+++

Any differences between proto2 and proto3 generated code
are highlighted&mdash;note that these differences are in the generated code as
described in this document, not the base message classes/interfaces, which are
the same in both versions. You should read the
[proto2 language guide](/programming-guides/proto2)
and/or
[proto3 language guide](/programming-guides/proto3)
before reading this document.

## Compiler Invocation {#invocation}

The protocol buffer compiler produces Kotlin code that builds on top of Java
code. As a result, it must be invoked with two command-line flags, `--java_out=`
and `--kotlin_out=`. The parameter to the `--java_out=` option is the directory
where you want the compiler to write your Java output, and the same for the
`--kotlin_out=`. For each `.proto` file input, the compiler creates a wrapper
`.java` file containing a Java class which represents the `.proto` file itself.

**Regardless** of whether or not your `.proto` file contains a line like the
following:

```proto
option java_multiple_files = true;
```

The compiler will create separate `.kt` files for each of the classes and
factory methods which it will generate for each top-level message declared in
the `.proto` file.

The Java package name for each file is the same as that used by the generated
Java code as described in the
[Java generated code reference](/reference/java/java-generated#package).

The output file is chosen by concatenating the parameter to `--kotlin_out=`, the
package name (with periods [.] replaced with slashes [/]), and the suffix
`Kt.kt` file name.

So, for example, let's say you invoke the compiler as follows:

```shell
protoc --proto_path=src --java_out=build/gen/java --kotlin_out=build/gen/kotlin src/foo.proto
```

If `foo.proto`'s Java package is `com.example` and it contains a message named
`Bar`, then the protocol buffer compiler will generate the file
`build/gen/kotlin/com/example/BarKt.kt`. The protocol buffer compiler will
automatically create the `build/gen/kotlin/com` and
`build/gen/kotlin/com/example` directories if needed. However, it will not
create `build/gen/kotlin`, `build/gen`, or `build`; they must already exist. You
can specify multiple `.proto` files in a single invocation; all output files
will be generated at once.

## Messages {#message}

Given a simple message declaration:

```proto
message FooBar {}
```

The protocol buffer compiler generates&mdash;in addition to the generated Java
code&mdash;an object called `FooBarKt`, as well as two top-level functions,
having the following structure:

```kotlin
object FooBarKt {
  class Dsl private constructor { ... }
}
inline fun fooBar(block: FooBarKt.Dsl.() -> Unit): FooBar
inline fun FooBar.copy(block: FooBarKt.Dsl.() -> Unit): FooBar
```

### Nested Types

A message can be declared inside another message. For example:

```proto
message Foo {
  message Bar { }
}
```

In this case, the compiler nests the `BarKt` object and the `bar` factory method
inside `FooKt`, though the `copy` method remains top-level:

```kotlin
object FooKt {
  class Dsl { ... }
  object BarKt {
    class Dsl private constructor { ... }
  }
  inline fun bar(block: FooKt.BarKt.Dsl.() -> Unit): Foo.Bar
}
inline fun foo(block: FooKt.Dsl.() -> Unit): Foo
inline fun Foo.copy(block: FooKt.Dsl.() -> Unit): Foo
inline fun Foo.Bar.copy(block: FooKt.BarKt.Dsl.() -> Unit): Foo.Bar
```

## Fields

In addition to the methods described in the previous section, the protocol
buffer compiler generates mutable properties in the DSL for each field defined
within the message in the `.proto` file. (Kotlin already infers read-only
properties on the message object from the getters generated by Java.)

Note that properties always use camel-case naming, even if the field name in the
`.proto` file uses lower-case with underscores
([as it should](/programming-guides/style)). The
case-conversion works as follows:

1.  For each underscore in the name, the underscore is removed, and the
    following letter is capitalized.
2.  If the name will have a prefix attached (for example, "clear"), the first
    letter is capitalized. Otherwise, it is lower-cased.

Thus, the field `foo_bar_baz` becomes `fooBarBaz`.

In a few special cases in which a field name conflicts with reserved words in
Kotlin or methods already defined in the protobuf library, an extra underscore
is appended. For instance, the clearer for a field named `in` is `clearIn_()`.

### Singular Fields (proto2)

For any of these field definitions:

```proto
optional int32 foo = 1;
required int32 foo = 1;
```

The compiler will generate the following accessors in the DSL:

-   `fun hasFoo(): Boolean`: Returns `true` if the field is set.
-   `var foo: Int`: The current value of the field. If the field is not set,
    returns the default value.
-   `fun clearFoo()`: Clears the value of the field. After calling this,
    `hasFoo()` will return `false` and `getFoo()` will return the default value.

For other simple field types, the corresponding Java type is chosen according to
the
[scalar value types table](/programming-guides/proto2#scalar).
For message and enum types, the value type is replaced with the message or enum
class. As the message type is still defined in Java, unsigned types in the
message are represented using the standard corresponding signed types in the
DSL, for compatibility with Java and older versions of Kotlin.

#### Embedded Message Fields

Note that there is no special handling of submessages. For example, if you have
a field

```proto
optional Foo my_foo = 1;
```

you must write

```kotlin
myFoo = foo {
  ...
}
```

In general, this is because the compiler does not know whether `Foo` has a
Kotlin DSL at all, or e.g. only has the Java APIs generated. This means that you
do not have to wait for messages you depend on to add Kotlin code generation.

### Singular Fields (proto3)

For this field definition:

```proto
int32 foo = 1;
```

The compiler will generate the following property in the DSL:

-   `var foo: Int`: Returns the current value of the field. If the field is not
    set, returns the default value for the field's type.
-   `fun clearFoo()`: Clears the value of the field. After calling this,
    `getFoo()` will return the default value for the field's type.

For other simple field types, the corresponding Java type is chosen according to
the
[scalar value types table](/programming-guides/proto2#scalar).
For message and enum types, the value type is replaced with the message or enum
class. As the message type is still defined in Java, unsigned types in the
message are represented using the standard corresponding signed types in the
DSL, for compatibility with Java and older versions of Kotlin.

#### Embedded Message Fields

For message field types, an additional accessor method is generated in the DSL:

-   `boolean hasFoo()`: Returns `true` if the field has been set.

Note that there is no shortcut for setting a submessage based on a DSL. For
example, if you have a field

```proto
Foo my_foo = 1;
```

you must write

```kotlin
myFoo = foo {
  ...
}
```

In general, this is because the compiler does not know whether `Foo` has a
Kotlin DSL at all, or e.g. only has the Java APIs generated. This means that you
do not have to wait for messages you depend on to add Kotlin code generation.

### Repeated Fields {#repeated}

For this field definition:

```proto
repeated string foo = 1;
```

The compiler will generate the following members in the DSL:

-   `class FooProxy: DslProxy`, an unconstructable type used only in generics
-   `val fooList: DslList<String, FooProxy>`, a read-only view of the list of
    current elements in the repeated field
-   `fun DslList<String, FooProxy>.add(value: String)`, an extension function
    allowing elements to be added to the repeated field
-   `operator fun DslList<String, FooProxy>.plusAssign(value: String)`, an alias
    for `add`
-   `fun DslList<String, FooProxy>.addAll(values: Iterable<String>)`, an
    extension function allowing an `Iterable` of elements to be added to the
    repeated field
-   `operator fun DslList<String, FooProxy>.plusAssign(values:
    Iterable<String>)`, an alias for `addAll`
-   `operator fun DslList<String, FooProxy>.set(index: Int, value: String)`, an
    extension function setting the value of the element at the given zero-based
    inde
-   `fun DslList<String, FooProxy>.clear()`, an extension function clearing the
    contents of the repeated field

This unusual construction allows `fooList` to \"behave like\" a mutable list
within the scope of the DSL, supporting only the methods supported by the
underlying builder, while preventing mutability from \"escaping\" the DSL, which
could cause confusing side effects.

For other simple field types, the corresponding Java type is chosen according to
the
[scalar value types table](/programming-guides/proto2#scalar).
For message and enum types, the type is the message or enum class.

### Oneof Fields

For this oneof field definition:

```proto
oneof oneof_name {
    int32 foo = 1;
    ...
}
```

The compiler will generate the following accessor methods in the DSL:

-   `val oneofNameCase: OneofNameCase`: gets which, if any, of the `oneof_name`
    fields are set; see the
    [Java code reference](/reference/java/java-generated#oneof)
    for the return type
-   `fun hasFoo(): Boolean` (proto2 only): Returns `true` if the oneof case is
    `FOO`.
-   `val foo: Int`: Returns the current value of `oneof_name` if the oneof case
    is `FOO`. Otherwise, returns the default value of this field.

For other simple field types, the corresponding Java type is chosen according to
the
[scalar value types table](/programming-guides/proto2#scalar).
For message and enum types, the value type is replaced with the message or enum
class.

### Map Fields

For this map field definition:

```proto
map<int32, int32> weight = 1;
```

The compiler will generate the following members in the DSL class:

-   `class WeightProxy private constructor(): DslProxy()`, an unconstructable
    type used only in generics
-   `val weight: DslMap<Int, Int, WeightProxy>`, a read-only view of the current
    entries in the map field
-   `fun DslMap<Int, Int, WeightProxy>.put(key: Int, value: Int)`: add the entry
    to this map field
-   `operator fun DslMap<Int, Int, WeightProxy>.put(key: Int, value: Int)`:
    alias for `put` using operator syntax
-   `fun DslMap<Int, Int, WeightProxy>.remove(key: Int)`: removes the entry
    associated with `key`, if present
-   `fun DslMap<Int, Int, WeightProxy>.putAll(map: Map<Int, Int>)`: adds all
    entries from the specified map to this map field, overwriting prior values
    for already present keys
-   `fun DslMap<Int, Int, WeightProxy>.clear()`: clears all entries from this
    map field

## Extensions (proto2 only) {#extension}

Given a message with an extension range:

```proto
message Foo {
  extensions 100 to 199;
}
```

The protocol buffer compiler will add the following methods to `FooKt.Dsl`:

-   `operator fun <T> get(extension: ExtensionLite<Foo, T>): T`: gets the
    current value of the extension field in the DSL
-   `operator fun <T> get(extension: ExtensionLite<Foo, List<T>>):
    ExtensionList<T, Foo>`: gets the current value of the repeated extension
    field in the DSL as a read-only `List`
-   `operator fun <T : Comparable<T>> set(extension: ExtensionLite<Foo, T>)`:
    sets the current value of the extension field in the DSL (for `Comparable`
    field types)
-   `operator fun <T : MessageLite> set(extension: ExtensionLite<Foo, T>)`: sets
    the current value of the extension field in the DSL (for message field
    types)
-   `operator fun set(extension: ExtensionLite<Foo, ByteString>)`: sets the
    current value of the extension field in the DSL (for `bytes` fields)
-   `operator fun contains(extension: ExtensionLite<Foo, *>): Boolean`: returns
    true if the extension field has a value
-   `fun clear(extension: ExtensionLite<Foo, *>)`: clears the extension field
-   `fun <E> ExtensionList<Foo, E>.add(value: E)`: adds a value to the repeated
    extension field
-   `operator fun <E> ExtensionList<Foo, E>.plusAssign(value: E)`: alias for
    `add` using operator syntax
-   `operator fun <E> ExtensionList<Foo, E>.addAll(values: Iterable<E>)`: adds
    multiple values to the repeated extension field
-   `operator fun <E> ExtensionList<Foo, E>.plusAssign(values: Iterable<E>)`:
    alias for `addAll` using operator syntax
-   `operator fun <E> ExtensionList<Foo, E>.set(index: Int, value: E)`: sets the
    element of the repeated extension field at the specified index
-   `inline fun ExtensionList<Foo, *>.clear()`: clears the elements of the
    repeated extension field

The generics here are complex, but the effect is that `this[extension] = value`
works for every extension type except repeated extensions, and repeated
extensions have \"natural\" list syntax that works similarly to
[non-extension repeated fields](#repeated).

Given an extension definition:

```proto
extend Foo {
  optional int32 bar = 123;
}
```

Java generates the \"extension identifier\" `bar`, which is used to \"key\"
extension operations above.
