+++
title = "Changes announced May 6, 2022"
linkTitle = "May 6, 2022"
toc_hide = "true"
description = "Changes announced for Protocol Buffers on May 6, 2022."
type = "docs"
+++

## Versioning {#versioning}

We changed our versioning scheme to enable more-nimble updates to
language-specific parts of Protocol Buffers. In the new scheme, each language
has its own major version that can be incremented independently of other
languages, as covered later in this topic with the Python release. The minor and
patch versions, however, will remain coupled. This allows us to introduce
breaking changes into some languages without requiring a bump of the major
version in languages that do not experience a breaking change.

The first instance of this new versioning scheme is the new version of the
Python API, 4.21.0, which follows the preceding version, 3.20.1. Other language
APIs will be released as 3.21.0.

## Python Updates {#python-updates}

We made some changes in Python language support in Protocol Buffers. Version
4.21.0 is a new major version, following 3.20.1. The new version is based on the
[upb library](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/upb), and offers
significantly better parsing performance than previous releases, especially for
large payloads. It also includes prebuilt binary modules for Apple silicon for
increased performance without a manual build.

The new release does contain some breaking changes. Specifically:

*   The
    [`UnknownFields()`](https://googleapis.dev/python/protobuf/3.17.0/google/protobuf/message.html#google.protobuf.message.Message.UnknownFields)
    method, which relied on an implicitly created class, is replaced with the
    explicitly-created `UnknownFieldSet` class.
*   Some non-core characteristics may have changed, such as the specific format
    of certain strings or error messages. These are not considered breaking
    changes, but may still impact your existing code base.
*   Applications that rely on sharing messages between Python and C++ break in
    the new version. Most developers won't be affected by this, but users of
    [Nucleus](https://github.com/google/nucleus) and possibly other
    libraries may be. As a workaround, you can
    [set an environment variable](/reference/python/python-generated#sharing-messages)
    that forces the library to preserve compatibility.
*   Python upb requires generated code that has been generated from protoc
    3.19.0 or newer.

## JavaScript Support {#javascript}

We moved some things around for Protocol Buffer support of JavaScript to allow
JavaScript to evolve and release independently of the main repo. Specifically,
we decoupled the language support from the
[main project](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf) and moved
it into its
[own repository](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf-javascript).

If you have created any pull requests related to JavaScript support in Protocol
Buffers that you'd still like to merge, feel free to replicate those against the
JavaScript repository. We will transfer GitHub issues automatically.
