+++
title = "Changes announced August 3, 2022"
linkTitle = "August 3, 2022"
toc_hide = "true"
description = "Changes announced for Protocol Buffers on August 3, 2022."
type = "docs"
+++

This topic covers two areas: general platform support changes, and C++-specific
changes that are being considered for the 22.x release line.

## Platform Support Changes {#platform-changes}

We've added guidance about the platforms that we support in
[this section](/programming-guides/proto2#platforms) of
the documentation. The section currently covers C++ and PHP, but may be expanded
with information about other platforms in the future.

## Official C++ Support Matrix {#cpp-support-matrix}

With the policy, mentioned earlier in this announcement, of using Google's
official
[foundational C++ support policy](/programming-guides/proto2#platforms),
our
[C++ compiler and toolchain support matrix will change](https://github.com/google/oss-policies-info/blob/8067c719150dfec6a836dd82230c5eb0ba11acd7/foundational-cxx-support-matrix.md).

## C++ Changes {#cpp-changes}

Following the announcement of our
[new major version and breaking changes policy](/news/2022-07-06),
we are planning a major version bump for C++. We plan to make some changes to
the assets that we release starting with our 22.x release line.

The following sections outline the set of breaking changes that we plan to
include in the 22.0 release of protocol buffers. Note that plans can and do
change. These are potential breaking changes to be aware of, but they may not
happen in this particular release, or they may not happen at all.

### Adding C++20 Support {#c20-support}

Because of the addition of new keywords to the C++ language, adding support for
C++20 is a breaking change for users even if they do not currently use C++20.

Mitigations for this to conditionally change names only in certain compiler
modes would break projects that support multiple language standards.

### Dropping C++11 Support {#c11-support}

Per our
[C++ support policy](https://opensource.google/documentation/policies/cplusplus-support#4_c_language_standard),
we plan to drop C++11 support. This is a breaking change.

### Dropping Autotools Support {#autotools}

Per our
[build systems support policy](https://opensource.google/documentation/policies/cplusplus-support#3_build_systems),
we plan to drop autotools support. This is a breaking change. After autotools
support is dropped, protobuf will support only CMake and Bazel.

### Dropping Support for PHP <7.4 {#php-74}

Per our
[PHP support policy](https://cloud.google.com/php/getting-started/supported-php-versions),
we plan to drop support for EOL versions of PHP. This is not considered a
breaking change since these versions are already EOL in the broader ecosystem.

### Adding an Abseil Dependency {#abseil-dep}

In order to reduce the Google vs. OSS differences between protobuf and to
simplify our own project, we plan to take a formal dependency on Abseil. In
time, we plan to start using Abseil types in our public APIs, but simply adding
the dependency is a breaking change.

### Dropping Language-Specific Source Distributions {#lang-specific-distros}

To reduce dependence on autotools and minimize the number of artifacts we
release, we plan to stop publishing language-specific source distributions on
our
[GitHub release page](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/releases).
Instead, we advise users to download the
[source code distribution](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/releases)
automatically generated by GitHub on the release page.

### Changing Maven Release Candidate Artifact Names to Be More Idiomatic {#idiomatic}

In 22.0 we plan to rename Maven artifacts to use “RC” instead of “rc-” as the
release candidate prefix.
