+++
title = "Changes announced on December 13, 2023"
linkTitle = "December 13, 2023"
toc_hide = "true"
description = "Changes announced for Protocol Buffers on December 13, 2023."
type = "docs"
+++

## C++ Breaking Changes

In v26, we are planning a major version bump for C++ as per our
[breaking changes policy](/news/2022-07-06) and
[version support policy](/support/version-support#cpp-tooling).

The following sections outline the set of breaking changes that we plan to
include in the 26.0 release of protocol buffers. Note that plans can and do
change. These are potential breaking changes to be aware of, but they may not
happen in this particular release, or they may not happen at all.

### Remove deprecated clear APIs on repeated fields

The following deprecated methods are removed:

*   `RepeatedPtrField::ReleaseCleared()`
*   `RepeatedPtrField::ClearedCount()`
*   `RepeatedPtrField::AddCleared()`

### Remove C++ legacy syntax descriptor APIs

With the release of [editions](/editions), syntax is no
longer supported for business logic. Instead, use the various feature helpers
defined in
[`descriptor.h`](/reference/cpp/api-docs/google.protobuf.descriptor)
to query more targeted behaviors, such as
[`has_presence`](/reference/cpp/api-docs/google.protobuf.descriptor#FieldDescriptor.has_presence.details),
to query features in C++.

### Remove deprecated syntax accessor

We plan to remove the deprecated syntax accessor, `FileDescriptor::Syntax`, in
v26. We recommend using the getters from `FileDescriptor::edition` instead.

### Remove deprecated SupportsUnknownEnumValues method

The `SupportsUnknownEnumValues` method was
[deprecated in March, 2023](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/pull/12129).
We plan to remove it in v26.

### Remove std::string error collector overrides

We are planning to remove the deprecated `std::string` methods in error
collectors.

## Python Breaking Changes

In v26, we are planning a major version bump for Python as per our
[breaking changes policy](/news/2022-07-06) and
[version support policy](/support/version-support#python-support).

### Timestamps are checked for validity

In v26, the system will check if `Timestamp` values are valid. Seconds must be
in the range [-62135596800, 253402300799] and nanos must be in range [0,
999999999]. Values outside those ranges will raise an exception.

### Remove deprecated syntax accessor

We plan to remove the deprecated syntax accessor, `FileDescriptor.syntax`, in
v26. We plan to add `FileDescriptor.edition` in its place.

### UnknownFields support removal

In v25
[`message.UnknownFields()`](https://googleapis.dev/python/protobuf/latest/google/protobuf/message.html#google.protobuf.message.Message.UnknownFields)
was deprecated in pure Python and C++ extensions. We plan to remove it v26. Use
the new
[`UnknownFieldSet(message)`](https://googleapis.dev/python/protobuf/latest/google/protobuf/unknown_fields.html)
support in `unknown_fields.py` as a replacement.

More details about all of these changes will be available in the corresponding
release notes.
