+++
title = "Changes announced on December 5, 2023"
linkTitle = "December 5, 2023"
toc_hide = "true"
description = "Changes announced for Protocol Buffers on December 5, 2023."
type = "docs"
+++

## Java Breaking Changes

In v26, we are planning a major version bump for Java per our
[breaking changes policy](/news/2022-07-06) and
[version support policy](/support/version-support#java).

The following sections outline the set of breaking changes that we plan to
include in the 26.0 release of protocol buffers. Note that plans can and do
change. These are potential breaking changes to be aware of, but they may not
happen in this particular release, or they may not happen at all.

### Poison Pilling Gencode / Runtime Mismatches

Per our
[Cross-Version Runtime Guarantees](/support/cross-version-runtime-guarantee),
Protobuf does not support mixing generated code and runtimes across major
version boundaries, or mixing generated code from a newer version of protoc with
older runtimes within a single major runtime version. We plan to introduce
“poison pills” to detect and enforce these disallowed mismatches.

This is not considered a breaking change since this simply adds enforcement of
existing policies, but may require users to update their generated code.

### Breaking Compatibility with Old Generated Code

v26.x will break compatibility with generated code from older major versions.
Users should regenerate old generated code to be from the same version.

For example, `GeneratedMessageV3`, which was originally introduced for backwards
compatibility with generated code from v2.x.x against v3.x.x runtime, will be
renamed to `GeneratedMessage`. Runtimes will be updated to support
[Editions](/editions/overview/), which will not be
compatible with old generated code.

This is in accordance with our existing
[Cross-Version Runtime Guarantees](/support/cross-version-runtime-guarantee)
and is a breaking change.

### Removing Deprecated Methods/Variables

v26.x will remove access to deprecated methods and variables. These will
generally have already been marked `@Deprecated` in a previous release.

This will remove access to the following non-exhaustive list:

*   Descriptor syntax APIs, which should be replaced with corresponding feature
    accessors (such as `FieldDescriptor.hasPresence()`,
    `EnumDescriptor.isClosed()`)

*   TextFormat print methods, which should be replaced by corresponding
    `TextFormat.printer()` methods.

*   PARSER variable, which should be replaced by the `parser()` method.

*   Runtime methods for old v2.x.x gencode compatibility. This is no longer
    supported, as per our
    [Cross Version Runtime Guarantees](/support/cross-version-runtime-guarantee).

More details will be available in the corresponding release notes.
