+++
title = "Changes announced April 11, 2023"
linkTitle = "April 11, 2023"
toc_hide = "true"
description = "Changes announced for Protocol Buffers on April 11, 2023."
type = "docs"
+++

## Syntax Reflection Deprecation {#deprecation}

v23 will deprecate the ability to check syntax version using reflection. The
deprecation will be included as warnings at build time. The capability will be
removed in a future release.

## Adding support for ctype=CORD in C++ {#cord}

v23 will add `ctype=CORD` support for singular `bytes`
fields, including `oneof` fields, to specify that data should be stored using
[`absl::cord`](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/strings/cord.h)
instead of `string`. Support may be added in future releases for singular
`string` field types and for `repeated` `string` and `byte` fields if there is
enough interest from the open source community.

`ctype=CORD` will have no effect on extensions.

You will be able to add the support using field options:

```proto
optional bytes foo = 25 [ctype=CORD];
```

## Option Retention {#retention}

Options now have a notion of *retention*, which controls whether an option is
retained in the generated code. Options have always had *runtime retention* by
default, meaning that they are retained in the generated code and are thus
visible at runtime in the generated descriptor pool. However, you can now set
`retention = RETENTION_SOURCE` to specify that an option (or field within an
option) must not be retained at runtime. This is called *source retention*.

Setting retention looks like this:

```proto
extend google.protobuf.FileOptions {
  optional int32 source_retention_option = 1234
      [retention = RETENTION_SOURCE];
}
```

It can also be set on a plain field, in which case it takes effect only when
that field appears inside an option:

```proto
message OptionsMessage {
  optional int32 source_retention_field = 1 [retention = RETENTION_SOURCE];
}
```

For more information, see
[Option Retention](/programming-guides/proto3#option-retention).

## Dropping Support for Bazel <5.3 {#bazel}

v23 will drop support for Bazel 4. Protobuf will continue to support the Bazel 5
LTS with Bazel 5.3 as the minimum required version. This is per the build
support policy described in
[Foundational C++ Support Policy](https://opensource.google/documentation/policies/cplusplus-support#build_systems)
and as reflected in the versions in
[Foundational C++ Support](https://github.com/google/oss-policies-info/blob/main/foundational-cxx-support-matrix.md).
