+++
title = "Changes Announced on October 1, 2024"
linkTitle = "October 1, 2024"
toc_hide = "true"
description = "Changes announced for Protocol Buffers on October 1, 2024."
type = "docs"
+++

## Bazel and Proto Rules

There are upcoming changes to the way that Bazel will work for protobuf builds.
These changes require awareness in the first stage, and action by project owners
before the second stage.

### Stage 1

With the release of Bazel 8, proto rules (`proto_library`, `cc_proto_library`,
`java_proto_library`, `java_lite_proto_library`, and `py_proto_library`) will be
removed from the Bazel project. The will be added to the Protocol Buffers
project in v29. Bazel will be updated to automatically use the rules from the
protobuf project, so the change is initially a no-op for project owners.

After the release of Bazel 8 and before the release of Bazel 9, users will need
to explicitly `load` the rules from the Protocol Buffers project repository. The
automatic use of the rules is only temporary to support the migration.

Users should add the following `load()` statements to any `BUILD` or `.bzl`
files that use these proto rules. Note that these require Protobuf v29.0 or
higher.

```bazel
load("@protobuf//bazel:proto_library.bzl", "proto_library")

load("@protobuf//bazel:cc_proto_library.bzl", "cc_proto_library")
load("@protobuf//bazel:java_proto_library.bzl", "java_proto_library")
load("@protobuf//bazel:java_lite_proto_library.bzl", "java_lite_proto_library")
load("@protobuf//bazel:py_proto_library.bzl", "py_proto_library")
```

### Stage 2

When Bazel 9 is released, the automatic loading of the protobuf library’s rules
will be removed. At that point, you will need to have `load` statements in your
Bazel build files.

### End Goal

Once the rules are in the protobuf repo, we intend to address common user
requests, such as using prebuilts for the proto compiler where possible.
