+++
title = "Changes Announced on June 27, 2025"
linkTitle = "June 27, 2025"
toc_hide = "true"
description = "Changes announced for Protocol Buffers on June 27, 2025."
type = "docs"
+++

## Edition 2024

We are planning to release Protobuf Edition 2024 in 32.x in Q3 2025.

These describe changes as we anticipate them being implemented, but due to the
flexible nature of software some of these changes may not land or may vary from
how they are described in this topic.

More documentation on Edition 2024 will be published in
[Feature Settings for Editions](/editions/features),
including information on migrating from Edition 2023.

## Changes to Existing Features {#changes}

This section details any existing features whose default settings will change in
Edition 2024.

### C++ string_type {#string_type}

The default for `string_type` feature, originally released in Edition 2023, will
change from `STRING` to `VIEW` in Edition 2024.

See
[`features.(pb.cpp).string_type`](/editions/features#string_type)
and [String View APIs](/reference/cpp/string-view) for
more information on this feature and its feature values.

## New Features {#new-features}

This section details any new features that will be introduced in Edition 2024.

### `enforce_naming_style` {#enforce_naming}

[`feature.enforce_naming_style`](/editions/features#enforce_naming)
enables strict naming style enforcement to ensure protos are round-trippable by
default with a feature value to opt-out to use legacy naming style.

### `default_symbol_visibility` {#default_symbol}

This feature controls whether the default symbol visibility of importable
symbols (such as messages and enums) is either:

*   `export`: referenceable from other protos via import statements
*   `local`: un-referenceable outside of current file

The default feature value `EXPORT_TOP_LEVEL` in Edition 2024 ensures top-level
symbols are export by default, whereas nested symbols are local by default.

This can be used along with the [`export` and `local` keywords](#export-local)
to explicitly annotate symbol visibility, also added in Edition 2024.

Symbol visibility only controls which symbols can be imported from other proto
files, but does not affect code-generation.

### C++: `enum_name_uses_string_view` {#enum_name}

Previously, all generated enum types provide the following function to obtain
the label out of an enum value, which has significant overhead to construct the
`std::string` instances at runtime:

```cpp
const std::string& Foo_Name(int);
```

The default feature value in Edition 2024 instead migrates this signature to
return `absl::string_view` to allow for better storage decoupling and potential
memory/CPU savings.

```cpp
absl::string_view Foo_Name(int);
```

Users should migrate their code to handle the new return-type following
[the migration guide](/support/migration#string_view-return-type).

See [String View APIs](/reference/cpp/string-view) for
more information.

### Java: `nest_in_file_class` {#nest_in}

This feature controls whether the Java generator will nest the generated class
in the Java generated file class.

The default value in Edition 2024 generates classes in their own files by
default, which is also the default behavior of the previous
`java_multiple_files = true` file option. This replaces `java_multiple_files`
which is removed in Edition 2024.

The default outer classname is also updated to always be the camel-cased
`.proto` filename suffixed with Proto by default (for example,
`foo/bar_baz.proto -> BarBazProto`). You can override this using the
`java_outer_classname` file option and replace the pre-Edition 2024 default of
`BarBaz` or `BarBazOuterClass` depending on the presence of conflicts.

### Java: `large_enum` {#large_enum}

This feature allows creation of large Java enums, extending beyond the enum
limit due to standard constant limits imposed by the Java language.

Creation of large enums is not enabled by default, but you can explicitly enable
it using this feature. Note that this feature replicates enum-like behavior but
has some notable differences (for example, switch statements are not supported).

## Grammar Changes {#grammar-changes}

### `import option` {#import-option}

Edition 2024 adds support for option imports using the syntax `import option`.

Unlike normal `import` statements, `import option` only imports custom options
defined in a `.proto` file, without importing other symbols.

This means that messages and enums are excluded from the option import. In the
following example, the `Bar` message cannot be used as a field type in
`foo.proto`, but options with type `Bar` can still be set.

Option imports must also come after any other import statements.

Example:

```proto
// bar.proto
edition = "2024";

import "google/protobuf/descriptor.proto";

message Bar {
  bool bar = 1;
}

extend proto2.FileOptions {
  bool file_opt1 = 5000;
  Bar file_opt2 = 5001;
}
```

```proto
// foo.proto:
edition = "2024";

import option "bar.proto";

option (file_opt1) = true;
option (file_opt2) = {bar: true};

message Foo {
  // Bar bar = 1; // This is not allowed
}
```

Option imports do not require generated code for its symbols and thus must be
provided as `option_deps` in `proto_library` instead of `deps`. This avoids
generating unreachable code.

```build
proto_library(
  name = "foo",
  srcs = ["foo.proto"],
  option_deps = [":custom_option"]
)
```

Option imports and `option_deps` are strongly recommended when importing
protobuf language features and other custom options to avoid generating
unnecessary code.

`option_deps` requires Bazel 8 or later since the `native.proto_library` in
Bazel 7 does not support this.

This also replaces `import weak`, which is removed in Edition 2024.

### `export` / `local` Keywords {#export-local}

`export` and `local` keywords are added in Edition 2024 as modifiers for the
symbol visibility of importable symbols, from the default behavior specified by
the
[`default_symbol_visibility` feature](/editions/features#symbol-vis).

This controls which symbols can be imported from other proto files, but does not
affect code-generation.

In Edition 2024, these can be set on all message and enum symbols by default.
However, some values of the `default_symbol_visibility` feature further restrict
which symbols are exportable.

Example:

```proto
// Top-level symbols are exported by default in Edition 2024
local message LocalMessage {
  // Nested symbols are local by default in Edition 2024
  export enum ExportedNestedEnum {
    UNKNOWN_EXPORTED_NESTED_ENUM_VALUE = 0;
  }
}
```

### "import weak" and `weak` Field Option {#import-weak}

Weak imports are no longer allowed as of Edition 2024.

Most users previously relying on `import weak` to declare a “weak dependency” to
import custom options without generated code for C++ and Go should instead
migrate to use
[`import option`](/editions/overview#import-option)
instead.

### `ctype` Field Option {#ctype}

`ctype` field option is no longer allowed as of Edition 2024. Use the
[`features.(pb.cpp).string_type`](/editions/features#string_type)
feature, instead.

### `java_multiple_files` File Option {#java_multiple}

The `java_multiple_files` file option is removed in Edition 2024 in favor of the
new
[`features.nest_in_file_class`](/editions/features#java-nest_in_file)
Java feature.
