+++
title = "News Announcements for Version 21.x"
linkTitle = "Version 21.x"
toc_hide = "true"
description = "Changes announced for Protocol Buffers version 21.x."
type = "docs"
+++

The following announcements are specific to Version 21.x. For information
presented chronologically, see [News](/news).

## Python Updates {#python-updates}

We made some changes in Python language support in Protocol Buffers. Version
4.21.0 is a new major version, following 3.20.1. The new version is based on the
[upb library](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/upb), and offers
significantly better parsing performance than previous releases, especially for
large payloads. It also includes prebuilt binary modules for Apple silicon for
increased performance without a manual build.

The new release does contain some breaking changes. Specifically:

*   The
    [`UnknownFields()`](https://googleapis.dev/python/protobuf/3.17.0/google/protobuf/message.html#google.protobuf.message.Message.UnknownFields)
    method, which relied on an implicitly created class, is replaced with the
    explicitly-created `UnknownFieldSet` class.
*   Some non-core characteristics may have changed, such as the specific format
    of certain strings or error messages. These are not considered breaking
    changes, but may still impact your existing code base.
*   Applications that rely on sharing messages between Python and C++ break in
    the new version. Most developers won't be affected by this, but users of
    [Nucleus](https://github.com/google/nucleus) and possibly other
    libraries may be. As a workaround, you can
    [set an environment variable](/reference/python/python-generated#sharing-messages)
    that forces the library to preserve compatibility.
*   Python upb requires generated code that has been generated from protoc
    3.19.0 or newer.
