+++
title = "News Announcements for Version 25.x"
linkTitle = "Version 25.x"
toc_hide = "true"
description = "Changes announced for Protocol Buffers version 25.x."
type = "docs"
+++

The following announcements are specific to Version 25.x. For information
presented chronologically, see [News](/news).

## Python Breaking Change

In v25
[`message.UnknownFields()`](https://googleapis.dev/python/protobuf/latest/google/protobuf/message.html#google.protobuf.message.Message.UnknownFields)
will be deprecated in pure Python and C++ extensions. It will be removed in v26.
Use the new
[`UnknownFieldSet(message)`](https://googleapis.dev/python/protobuf/latest/google/protobuf/unknown_fields.html)
support in `unknown_fields.py` as a replacement.

## μpb Moving to the Protobuf Git Repository

Starting with the v25 release, μpb now lives in the
[protobuf repo](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf) instead
of in its [former location](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/upb)
in a separate repo. All μpb development going forward will take place only in
the new location.

The merger of the two repos will simplify and speed up our development process
by removing the need to update pinned version dependencies between protobuf and
μpb. Changes to μpb now take effect immediately in protobuf code and vice versa,
without the need for a manual upgrade step.

We expect that most users will not need to take much, if any, action to
accommodate the change. μpb is the engine behind our Ruby, PHP, and Python
implementations, but you will most likely not notice the change unless you have
code that refers to μpb directly.

If you refer to μpb from a Bazel project, you will need to update μpb references
to point to protobuf instead (for example, replace `@upb` with
`@com_google_protobuf`). We are keeping μpb file paths and Bazel targets the
same to minimize the need for additional changes, but there are two exceptions:

-   The `upbc` directory has been renamed `upb_generator`.
-   The top-level `BUILD` file for μpb has moved into the `upb` directory. So,
    for example, references to `@upb//:reflection` should now be written
    `@com_google_protobuf//upb:reflection`.

## Poison Java gencode

We are patching a change into the 25.x branch that will poison Java gencode that
was created prior to the
[3.21.7 release](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/releases/tag/v21.7).
We will then mark all versions of Java protobuf from 3.21.7 through 3.25.5 as
vulnerable to the
[footmitten CVE](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/security/advisories/GHSA-h4h5-3hr4-j3g2).

After this change is patched in, protobuf will throw an
`UnsupportedOperationException` from the
[`makeExtensionsImmutable`](https://protobuf.dev/reference/java/api-docs/com/google/protobuf/GeneratedMessage.html#makeExtensionsImmutable\(\))
method unless you set the system property
"`-Dcom.google.protobuf.use_unsafe_pre22_gencode`". Using this system property
can buy you some time if you can't update your code immediately, but should be
considered a short-term workaround.
