+++
title = "News Announcements for Version 26.x"
linkTitle = "Version 26.x"
toc_hide = "true"
description = "Changes announced for Protocol Buffers version 26.x."
type = "docs"
+++

The following announcements are specific to Version 26.x. For information
presented chronologically, see [News](/news).

## General Changes

### JSON Formatter Option Changes {#JSON}

Starting in the 26.x line, the JSON formatter option to print default-valued
fields is replaced with a fixed way to handle proto2 and proto3 `optional`
fields consistently.

*   Java: `includingDefaultValueFields()` is replaced with
    `alwaysPrintFieldsWithNoPresence()`.
*   C++: `always_print_default_values` is replaced with
    `always_print_fields_with_no_presence=True`.
*   Py: `including_default_value_fields=True` is replaced with
    `always_print_fields_with_no_presence=True`.

The new flag behaves identically to the old flag on proto3 messages, but no
longer applies to proto2 `optional` fields. The old flags applied to proto2
`optional` fields but not proto3 `optional` fields.

### Poison Pilling Gencode / Runtime Mismatches

Per our
[Cross-Version Runtime Guarantees](/support/cross-version-runtime-guarantee),
Protobuf does not support mixing generated code and runtimes across major
version boundaries, or mixing generated code from a newer version of protoc with
older runtimes within a single major runtime version. We plan to introduce
“poison pills” to detect and enforce these disallowed mismatches.

This is not considered a breaking change since this simply adds enforcement of
existing policies, but may require users to update their generated code.

## C++ Breaking Changes

In v26, we are planning a major version bump for C++ as per our
[breaking changes policy](/news/2022-07-06) and
[version support policy](/support/version-support#cpp-tooling).

The following sections outline the set of breaking changes that we plan to
include in the 26.0 release of protocol buffers. Note that plans can and do
change. These are potential breaking changes to be aware of, but they may not
happen in this particular release, or they may not happen at all.

### Remove deprecated clear APIs on repeated fields

The following deprecated methods are removed:

*   `RepeatedPtrField::ReleaseCleared()`
*   `RepeatedPtrField::ClearedCount()`
*   `RepeatedPtrField::AddCleared()`

### Remove C++ legacy syntax descriptor APIs

With the release of [editions](/editions), syntax is no
longer supported for business logic. Instead, use the various feature helpers
defined in
[`descriptor.h`](/reference/cpp/api-docs/google.protobuf.descriptor)
to query more targeted behaviors, such as
[`has_presence`](/reference/cpp/api-docs/google.protobuf.descriptor#FieldDescriptor.has_presence.details),
to query features in C++.

### Remove deprecated syntax accessor

We plan to remove the deprecated syntax accessor, `FileDescriptor::Syntax`, in
v26. We recommend using the getters from `FileDescriptor::edition` instead.

### Remove deprecated SupportsUnknownEnumValues method

The `SupportsUnknownEnumValues` method was
[deprecated in March, 2023](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/pull/12129).
We plan to remove it in v26.

### Remove std::string error collector overrides

We are planning to remove the deprecated `std::string` methods in error
collectors.

## Java Breaking Changes

In v26, we are planning a major version bump for Java per our
[breaking changes policy](/news/2022-07-06) and
[version support policy](/support/version-support#java).

The following sections outline the set of breaking changes that we plan to
include in the 26.0 release of protocol buffers. Note that plans can and do
change. These are potential breaking changes to be aware of, but they may not
happen in this particular release, or they may not happen at all.

### Breaking Compatibility with Old Generated Code

v26.x will break compatibility with generated code from older major versions.
Users should regenerate old generated code to be from the same version.

For example, `GeneratedMessageV3`, which was originally introduced for backwards
compatibility with generated code from v2.x.x against v3.x.x runtime, will be
renamed to `GeneratedMessage`. Runtimes will be updated to support
[Editions](/editions/overview/), which will not be
compatible with old generated code.

This is in accordance with our existing
[Cross-Version Runtime Guarantees](/support/cross-version-runtime-guarantee)
and is a breaking change.

### Removing Deprecated Methods/Variables

v26.x will remove access to deprecated methods and variables. These will
generally have already been marked `@Deprecated` in a previous release.

This will remove access to the following non-exhaustive list:

*   Descriptor syntax APIs, which should be replaced with corresponding feature
    accessors (such as `FieldDescriptor.hasPresence()`,
    `EnumDescriptor.isClosed()`)

*   TextFormat print methods, which should be replaced by corresponding
    `TextFormat.printer()` methods.

*   PARSER variable, which should be replaced by the `parser()` method.

*   Runtime methods for old v2.x.x gencode compatibility. This is no longer
    supported, as per our
    [Cross Version Runtime Guarantees](/support/cross-version-runtime-guarantee).

More details will be available in the corresponding release notes.

## PHP Breaking Changes

The following changes are planned for the 26.x line:

*   Validate UTF-8 for string fields in setters.
*   Remove generic services.
    ([commit 40ad3fa](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/commit/40ad3fac603ba3c96e52a1266cd785a7adb8e3e4))

## Python Breaking Changes

In v26, we are planning a major version bump for Python as per our
[breaking changes policy](/news/2022-07-06) and
[version support policy](/support/version-support#python-support).

The following changes are planned for the 26.x line:

*   Make `str(msg)` escape any invalid UTF-8 in string fields.
*   Make `text_format.MessageToString()` default to outputting raw UTF-8, while
    escaping any invalid UTF-8 sequences.
*   Fix timestamp bounds ([commit 1250d5f](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/commit/1250d5f6cccb0a45f959c7219980a0aad5060ee5))

### Removing Deprecated APIs

In the 26.x release, the following deprecated APIs will be removed:

*   [`AddFileDescriptor`](https://googleapis.dev/python/protobuf/latest/google/protobuf/descriptor_pool.html#google.protobuf.descriptor_pool.DescriptorPool.AddFileDescriptor)
*   [`AddDescriptor`](https://googleapis.dev/python/protobuf/latest/google/protobuf/descriptor_pool.html#google.protobuf.descriptor_pool.DescriptorPool.AddDescriptor)
*   [`AddEnumDescriptor`](https://googleapis.dev/python/protobuf/latest/google/protobuf/descriptor_pool.html#google.protobuf.descriptor_pool.DescriptorPool.AddEnumDescriptor)
*   [`AddExtensionDescriptor`](https://googleapis.dev/python/protobuf/latest/google/protobuf/descriptor_pool.html#google.protobuf.descriptor_pool.DescriptorPool.AddExtensionDescriptor)
*   [`AddServiceDescriptor`](https://googleapis.dev/python/protobuf/latest/google/protobuf/descriptor_pool.html#google.protobuf.descriptor_pool.DescriptorPool.AddServiceDescriptor)

### Rejecting Extend Repeated Field with None Iterable

Starting in the 26.x release, extending repeated fields with a `None` iterable
will be rejected (it will raise a `TypeError`). For example,
`m.repeated_int32.extend(None)` will be rejected.

### Removing RegisterExtension in message class

Starting in the 26.x release,
[`RegisterExtension`](https://googleapis.dev/python/protobuf/latest/google/protobuf/descriptor_pb2.html#google.protobuf.descriptor_pb2.DescriptorProto.ExtensionRange.RegisterExtension)
will be removed. You can access extensions in Python using the `Extensions`
property on message objects.

This affects both pure Python and the C++ implementation of Python, but not upb
Python.

### Removing `setup.py` and `setup.cfg` support from GitHub

In the 26.x release, `setup.py` and `setup.cfg` will no longer be present in the
`python/` directory of
[the GitHub repository](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/tree/main/python)
or GitHub
[release tarballs](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/releases). This
means it will no longer be possible to build a Python package directly from the
GitHub repo or release tarball.

The Python source packages published
[on PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/protobuf/#files) *will* continue to have a
`setup.py` in the top-level directory. This is the supported and recommended way
of building Python binary packages, for users who do not want to use the binary
packages that we distribute on PyPI.

For more information, see
[#15671](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/pull/15671).

### Timestamps are checked for validity

In v26, the system will check if `Timestamp` values are valid. Seconds must be
in the range [-62135596800, 253402300799] and nanos must be in range [0,
999999999]. Values outside those ranges will raise an exception.

### Remove deprecated syntax accessor

We plan to remove the deprecated syntax accessor, `FileDescriptor.syntax`, in
v26. We plan to add `FileDescriptor.edition` in its place.

### UnknownFields support removal

In v25
[`message.UnknownFields()`](https://googleapis.dev/python/protobuf/latest/google/protobuf/message.html#google.protobuf.message.Message.UnknownFields)
was deprecated in pure Python and C++ extensions. We plan to remove it v26. Use
the new
[`UnknownFieldSet(message)`](https://googleapis.dev/python/protobuf/latest/google/protobuf/unknown_fields.html)
support in `unknown_fields.py` as a replacement.

More details about all of these changes will be available in the corresponding
release notes.

## Ruby Breaking Changes

*   Fix `RepeatedField#each_index` to have the correct semantics.
    ([#11767](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/pull/11767))
*   Remove Ruby DSL and associated compatibility code, which will complete the
    [migration announced in April](/news/2023-04-20).
*   `Message#to_h` fixes:
    *   Remove unset oneof fields.
        ([#6167](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/issues/6167))
    *   Remove unset sub-message fields
*   Use message's pool for
    [`encode_json`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/2fb0b93d9de226ea96f2dc2b4779eb4712d01d5c/ruby/ext/google/protobuf_c/message.c#L1118)/[`decode_json`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/2fb0b93d9de226ea96f2dc2b4779eb4712d01d5c/ruby/ext/google/protobuf_c/message.c#L1004).
*   Remove the deprecated syntax accessor, `FileDescriptor.syntax` and add
    semantic checks in its place:
    *   `FieldDescriptor.has_presence` to test if a field has presence.
    *   `FieldDescriptor.is_packed` to test if a repeated field is packed.
    *   `FieldDescriptor.requires_utf8_validation` to test if a string field
        requires UTF-8 validation.
    *   `EnumDescriptor.is_closed` to test if an enum is closed.

### Freeze Is Now Recursive in Ruby

Starting in the 26.x line, when freeze is applied it will be applied
recursively, affecting all sub-messages, maps, and repeated fields.

## upb Breaking Changes

The following changes are planned for the 26.x line:

*   Fix
    [nonconformance in JSON parsing](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/2f7b2832b6a62fec88efacbb97bf0a91b6a3670e/upb/conformance/conformance_upb_failures.txt)
    when `IgnoreUnknownEnumString` is enabled.
