+++
title = "News Announcements for Version 30.x"
linkTitle = "Version 30.x"
toc_hide = "true"
description = "Changes announced for Protocol Buffers version 30.x."
type = "docs"
+++

The following announcements are specific to Version 30.x. For information
presented chronologically, see [News](/news).

The following sections cover planned breaking changes in the v30 release,
expected in 2025 Q1. Also included are some changes that aren't breaking but may
require action on your part. These describe changes as we anticipate them being
implemented, but due to the flexible nature of software some of these changes
may not land or may vary from how they are described in this topic.

## Changes in C++ {#cpp}

C++ will bump its major version from 5.29.x to 6.30.x.

### Descriptor APIs {#descriptor-apis}

v30 will update return types in descriptor (such as `full_name`) to be
`absl::string_view`. This opens up memory savings in descriptors.

v28 introduced the `PROTOBUF_FUTURE_STRING_VIEW_RETURN_TYPE` macro, which you
can use in the meantime to enable the updated return type ahead of the breaking
release. The v30 release will flip the default and remove the macro.

### ctype Removed from FieldDescriptor Options {#ctype-removed}

v30 will stop exposing the `ctype` from `FieldDescriptor` options. You can use
the `FieldDescriptor::cpp_string_type()` API, added in the
[v28 release](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/releases/tag/v28.0),
in its place.

### Replace CMake Submodules with Fetched Deps {#replace-cmake-submods}

v30 will remove submodules and switches to upb's old CMake pattern of fetching
dependencies.

If you use installed packages, you won't be affected. It could break some CMake
workflows.

### Modify Debug APIs to Redact Sensitive Fields {#debug-redaction}

We are planning to modify the Protobuf debug APIs (including Protobuf
AbslStringify, `proto2::ShortFormat`, `proto2::Utf8Format`,
`Message::DebugString`, `Message::ShortDebugString`, `Message::Utf8DebugString`)
in v30 to redact sensitive fields annotated by `debug_redact`; the outputs of
these APIs will contain a per-process randomized prefix, and so will no longer
be parseable by Protobuf TextFormat Parsers.

Read more about this in the
[news article released November 21, 2024](/news/2024-11-21).

### Removing a a Reflection-related Function {#removing-mutable-repeated}

We are removing the following reflection-related function:
`MutableRepeatedFieldRef<T>::Reserve()`.

An upcoming performance improvement in
[`RepeatedPtrField`](/reference/cpp/api-docs/google.protobuf.repeated_field#RepeatedPtrField)
is incompatible with this API. The improvement is projected to accelerate
repeated access to the elements of `RepeatedPtrField`, in particular and
especially sequential access.

### Remove Deprecated APIs {#remove-deprecated}

v30 will remove the following public runtime APIs, which have been marked
deprecated (such as `ABSL_DEPRECATED`) for at least one minor or major release
and that are obsolete or replaced.

#### Arena::CreateMessage

**API:**
[`Arena::CreateMessage`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/f4b57b98b08aec8bc52e6a7b762edb7a1b9e8883/src/google/protobuf/arena.h#L179)

**Replacement:**
[`Arena::Create`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/f4b57b98b08aec8bc52e6a7b762edb7a1b9e8883/src/google/protobuf/arena.h#L191)

#### Arena::GetArena

**API:**
[`Arena::GetArena`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/237332ef92daf83a53e76decd6ac43c3fcee782b/src/google/protobuf/arena.h#L346)

**Replacement:** `value->GetArena()`

#### RepeatedPtrField::ClearedCount

**API:**
[`RepeatedPtrField::ClearedCount`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blame/f4b57b98b08aec8bc52e6a7b762edb7a1b9e8883/src/google/protobuf/repeated_ptr_field.h#L1157)

**Replacement:** Migrate to Arenas
([migration guide](https://protobuf.dev/support/migration/#cleared-elements)).

#### JsonOptions

**API:**
[`JsonOptions`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/f4b57b98b08aec8bc52e6a7b762edb7a1b9e8883/src/google/protobuf/util/json_util.h#L22)

**Replacement:** `JsonPrintOptions`

### Dropping C++14 Support {#drop-cpp-14}

This release will drop C++ 14 as the minimum supported version and raise it to
17, as per the
[Foundational C++ Support matrix](https://github.com/google/oss-policies-info/blob/main/foundational-cxx-support-matrix.md).

Per [our policies](https://protobuf.dev/support/version-support), we do not
consider this to be a breaking change.

### Introduce ASAN Poisoning After Clearing Oneof Messages on Arena

This change adds a hardening check that affects C++ protobufs using Arenas.
Oneof messages allocated on the protobuf arena will now be cleared in debug and
poisoned in ASAN mode. After calling clear, future attempts to use the memory
region will cause a crash in ASAN as a use-after-free error.

This implementation requires C++17.

### Dropping our C++ CocoaPods release

In v30, we will be dropping our C++ CocoaPods release, which has been broken
since v4.x.x. C++ users should use our
[GitHub release](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/releases) directly
instead.

## Changes in JRuby {#jruby}

v30 will flip the default implementation for JRuby to FFI, which may be breaking
for some JRuby users.

Note that this change doesn't create a Ruby major version bump because JRuby is
[not officially supported](/support/version-support/#ruby).

## Changes in Python {#python}

Python will bump its major version from 5.29.x to 6.30.x.

### Dropping Python 3.8 Support

As per our official Python support policy, we will be dropping support for
Python 3.8 and lower. This means the minimum supported Python version is 3.9.

### Remove bazel/system_python.bzl Alias {#python-remove-alias}

v30 will remove the legacy `bazel/system_python.bzl` alias.

Remove direct references to `system_python.bzl` in favor of using
`protobuf_deps.bzl` instead. Use `python/dist/system_python.bzl` where it was
moved
[in v5.27.0](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/commit/d7f032ad1596ceeabd45ca1354516c39b97b2551)
if you need a direct reference.

### Field Setter Validation Changes {#python-setter-validation}

Python's and upb's field setters will be fixed in v30 to validate closed enums
under edition 2023. Closed enum fields updated with invalid values will generate
errors.

### Remove Deprecated py_proto_library Macro

The deprecated internal `py_proto_library` Bazel macro in `protobuf.bzl` will be
removed in v30.x.

This should be replaced by the official `py_proto_library` which will be moved
to protobuf in `bazel/py_proto_library` as of v29.x. This implementation was
previously available in `rules_python` prior to v29.x.

### Remove Deprecated APIs {#python-remove-apis}

v30 will remove the following public runtime APIs, which have been marked
deprecated for at least one minor or major release and are obsolete or replaced.

#### Reflection Methods

**APIs:**
[`reflection.ParseMessage`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/7f395af40e86e00b892e812beb67a03564884756/python/google/protobuf/reflection.py#L40),
[`reflection.MakeClass`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/7f395af40e86e00b892e812beb67a03564884756/python/google/protobuf/reflection.py#L66)

**Replacement:** `message_factory.GetMessageClass()`

#### RPC Service Interfaces

**APIs:**
[`service.RpcException`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/21c545c8c5cec0b052dc7715b778f0353d37d02c/python/google/protobuf/service.py#L23),
[`service.Service`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/21c545c8c5cec0b052dc7715b778f0353d37d02c/python/google/protobuf/service.py#L28),
[`service.RpcController`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/21c545c8c5cec0b052dc7715b778f0353d37d02c/python/google/protobuf/service.py#L97),
and
[`service.RpcChannel`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/21c545c8c5cec0b052dc7715b778f0353d37d02c/python/google/protobuf/service.py#L180)

**Replacement:** Starting with version 2.3.0, RPC implementations should not try
to build on these, but should instead provide code generator plugins which
generate code specific to the particular RPC implementation.

#### MessageFactory and SymbolDatabase Methods

**APIs:**
[`MessageFactory.GetPrototype`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/7f395af40e86e00b892e812beb67a03564884756/python/google/protobuf/message_factory.py#L145),
[`MessageFactory.CreatePrototype`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/7f395af40e86e00b892e812beb67a03564884756/python/google/protobuf/message_factory.py#L165),
[`MessageFactory.GetMessages`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/7f395af40e86e00b892e812beb67a03564884756/python/google/protobuf/message_factory.py#L185),
[`SymbolDatabase.GetPrototype`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/7f395af40e86e00b892e812beb67a03564884756/python/google/protobuf/symbol_database.py#L54),
[`SymbolDatabase.CreatePrototype`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/7f395af40e86e00b892e812beb67a03564884756/python/google/protobuf/symbol_database.py#L60),
and
[`SymbolDatabase.GetMessages`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/7f395af40e86e00b892e812beb67a03564884756/python/google/protobuf/symbol_database.py#L66)

**Replacement:** `message_factory.GetMessageClass()` and
`message_factory.GetMessageClassesForFiles()`.

#### GetDebugString

**APIs:**
[`GetDebugString`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/7f395af40e86e00b892e812beb67a03564884756/python/google/protobuf/pyext/descriptor.cc#L1510)

**Replacement:**

No replacement. It's only in Python C++ which is no longer released. It is not
supported in pure Python or UPB.

### Python setdefault Behavior Change for Map Fields

Starting in v30, `setdefault` will be similar to `dict` for `ScalarMap`, except
that both key and value must be set. `setdefault` will be rejected for
`MessageMaps`.

## Python Nested Message Class \_\_qualname\_\_ Contains the Outer Message Name

Python nested message class `__qualname__` now contains the outer message name.
Prior to v30, `__qualname__` has the same result with `__name__` for nested
message, in that the outer message name was not included.

For example:

```python
message Foo {
  message Bar {
    bool bool_field = 1;
  }
}
nested = test_pb2.Foo.Bar()
self.assertEqual('Bar', nested.__class__.__name__)
self.assertEqual('Foo.Bar', nested.__class__.__qualname__) # It was 'Bar' before
```

## Changes in Objective-C {#objc}

**This will be the first breaking release for Objective-C**.

Objective-C will bump its major version from 3.x.x to 4.30.x.

### Overhaul Unknown Field Handling APIs Deprecating Most of the Existing APIs {#objc-field-handling}

v30 will deprecate `GPBUnknownFieldSet` and replace it with `GPBUnknownFields`.
The new type will preserve the ordering of unknown fields from the original
input or API calls, to ensure any semantic meaning to the ordering is maintained
when a message is written back out.

As part of this, the `GPBUnknownField` type also has its APIs changed, with
almost all of the existing APIs becoming deprecated and new ones added.

Deprecated property APIs:

*   `varintList`
*   `fixed32List`
*   `fixed64List`
*   `lengthDelimitedList`
*   `groupList`

Deprecated modification APIs:

*   `addVarint:`
*   `addFixed32:`
*   `addFixed64:`
*   `addLengthDelimited:`
*   `addGroup:`

Deprecated initializer `initWithNumber:`.

New property APIs:

*   `type`
*   `varint`
*   `fixed32`
*   `fixed64`
*   `lengthDelimited`
*   `group`

This type will model a single field number in its value, rather than *grouping*
all the values for a given field number. The APIs for creating new fields are
the `add*` APIs on the `GPBUnknownFields` class.

v30 will also deprecate `-[GPBMessage unknownFields]`. In its place, there will
be new APIs to extract and update the unknown fields of the message.

### Remove Deprecated APIs {#objc-remove-apis}

v30 will remove the following public runtime APIs, which have been marked
deprecated for at least one minor or major release and are obsolete or replaced.

#### GPBFileDescriptor

**API:**
[-[`GPBFileDescriptor` syntax]](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/44bd65b2d3c0470d91a23cc14df5ffb1ab0af7cd/objectivec/GPBDescriptor.h#L118-L119)

**Replacement:** Obsolete.

#### GPBMessage mergeFrom:extensionRegistry

**API:**
[-[`GPBMessage mergeFrom:extensionRegistry:`]](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/44bd65b2d3c0470d91a23cc14df5ffb1ab0af7cd/objectivec/GPBMessage.h#L258-L261)

**Replacement:**
[-[`GPBMessage mergeFrom:extensionRegistry:error:`]](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/44bd65b2d3c0470d91a23cc14df5ffb1ab0af7cd/objectivec/GPBMessage.h#L275-L277)

#### GPBDuration timeIntervalSince1970

**API:**
[-[`GPBDuration timeIntervalSince1970`]](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/29fca8a64b62491fb0a2ce61878e70eda88dde98/objectivec/GPBWellKnownTypes.h#L95-L100)

**Replacement:**
[-[`GPBDuration timeInterval`]](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/29fca8a64b62491fb0a2ce61878e70eda88dde98/objectivec/GPBWellKnownTypes.h#L74-L89)

#### GPBTextFormatForUnknownFieldSet

**API:**
[`GPBTextFormatForUnknownFieldSet()`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/29fca8a64b62491fb0a2ce61878e70eda88dde98/objectivec/GPBUtilities.h#L32-L43)

**Replacement:** Obsolete - Use
[`GPBTextFormatForMessage()`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/29fca8a64b62491fb0a2ce61878e70eda88dde98/objectivec/GPBUtilities.h#L20-L30),
which includes any unknown fields.

#### GPBUnknownFieldSet

**API:**
[`GPBUnknownFieldSet`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/224573d66a0cc958c76cb43d8b2eb3aa7cdb89f2/objectivec/GPBUnknownFieldSet.h)

**Replacement:**
[`GPBUnknownFields`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/224573d66a0cc958c76cb43d8b2eb3aa7cdb89f2/objectivec/GPBUnknownFields.h)

#### GPBMessage unknownFields

**API:**
[`GPBMessage unknownFields` property](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/224573d66a0cc958c76cb43d8b2eb3aa7cdb89f2/objectivec/GPBMessage.h#L73-L76)

**Replacement:**
[-[`GPBUnknownFields initFromMessage:`]](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/224573d66a0cc958c76cb43d8b2eb3aa7cdb89f2/objectivec/GPBUnknownFields.h#L30-L38),
[-[`GPBMessage mergeUnknownFields:extensionRegistry:error:`]](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/f26bdff7cc0bb7e8ed88253ba16f81614a26cf16/objectivec/GPBMessage.h#L506-L528),
and
[-[`GPBMessage clearUnknownFields`]](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/224573d66a0cc958c76cb43d8b2eb3aa7cdb89f2/objectivec/GPBMessage.h#L497-L504C9)

### Remove Deprecated Runtime APIs for Old Gencode {#objc-remove-apis-gencode}

This release will remove deprecated runtime methods that support the Objective-C
gencode from before the 3.22.x release. The library will also issue a log
message at runtime when old generated code is starting up.

**API:** [`+[GPBFileDescriptor
allocDescriptorForClass:file:fields:fieldCount:storageSize:flags:]`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/1b44ce0feef45a78ba99d09bd2e5ff5052a6541b/objectivec/GPBDescriptor_PackagePrivate.h#L213-L220)

**Replacement:** Regenerate with a current version of the library.

**API:** [`+[GPBFileDescriptor
allocDescriptorForClass:rootClass:file:fields:fieldCount:storageSize:flags:]`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/1b44ce0feef45a78ba99d09bd2e5ff5052a6541b/objectivec/GPBDescriptor_PackagePrivate.h#L221-L229)

**Replacement:** Regenerate with a current version of the library.

**API:** [`+[GPBEnumDescriptor
allocDescriptorForName:valueNames:values:count:enumVerifier:]`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/1b44ce0feef45a78ba99d09bd2e5ff5052a6541b/objectivec/GPBDescriptor_PackagePrivate.h#L285-L291)

**Replacement:** Regenerate with a current version of the library.

**API:** [`+[GPBEnumDescriptor
allocDescriptorForName:valueNames:values:count:enumVerifier:extraTextFormatInfo:]`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/1b44ce0feef45a78ba99d09bd2e5ff5052a6541b/objectivec/GPBDescriptor_PackagePrivate.h#L292-L299)

**Replacement:** Regenerate with a current version of the library.

**API:**
[`-[GPBExtensionDescriptor initWithExtensionDescription:]`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/1b44ce0feef45a78ba99d09bd2e5ff5052a6541b/objectivec/GPBDescriptor_PackagePrivate.h#L317-L320)

**Replacement:** Regenerate with a current version of the library.

## Other Changes {#other}

### Poison MSVC + Bazel

We will be dropping support for using Bazel and MSVC together in v34. As of v30,
we will poison this combination with an error unless you specify the opt-out
flag `--define=protobuf_allow_msvc=true` to silence it.

MSVC's path length limits combined with Bazel's sandboxing have become
increasingly difficult to support in combination. Rather than randomly break
users who install protobuf into a long path, we will prohibit the use of MSVC
from Bazel altogether. We will continue to support MSVC with CMake, and begin
supporting [clang-cl](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/UsersManual.html#clang-cl)
with Bazel. For any feedback or discussion, see
https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/issues/20085.

## Other Changes (Non-Breaking) {#non-breaking}

In addition to those breaking changes are some other changes worth noting. While
the following are not considered breaking changes, they may still impact users.

### Poison Pill Warnings {#poison}

v30 will update poison pills to emit warnings for old gencode + new runtime
combinations that work under the new rolling upgrade policy, but will break in
the *next* major bump. For example, Java 4.x.x gencode should work against 5.x.x
runtime but warn of upcoming breakage against 6.x.x runtime.

### Changes to UTF-8 Enforcement in C# and Ruby {#utf-8-enforcement}

v30 will includes a fix to make UTF-8 enforcement consistent across languages.
Users with bad non-UTF8 data in string fields may see surfaced UTF-8 enforcement
errors earlier.

### Ruby and PHP Errors in JSON Parsing

v30 fixes non-conformance in JSON parsing of strings in numeric fields per the
[JSON spec](https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/json/).

This fix will not be accompanied by a major version bump, but Ruby and PHP will
now raise errors for non-numeric strings (e.g. "", "12abc", "abc") in numeric
fields. v29.x will include a warning for these error cases.
