+++
title = "Java Proto Names"
weight = 655
linkTitle = "Generated Proto Names"
description = "Names that are generated by the immutable API."
type = "docs"
+++

This document contains information on what the fully-qualified Java name of a
proto is, based on the different proto options. This name corresponds to the
package you need to import to use that message.

## Immutable API Message Names { #immutable-api-message-names }

The names for protos generated by the immutable API (`java_proto_library` BUILD
target) are listed in the following table.

java_api_version | java_multiple_files | java_alt_api_package | java_package | java_outer_classname | Generated full message name
:--------------: | :-----------------: | -------------------- | ------------ | -------------------- | ---------------------------
1                | true                | Defined              | -            |                      | `$java_alt_api_package.$message`
1                | true                | Not defined          | Not defined  |                      | `com.google.protos.$package.proto2api.$message`
1                | true                | Not defined          | Defined      |                      | `$java_package.proto2api.$message`
1                | false               | Defined              | -            | Not defined          | `$java_alt_api_package.$derived_outer_class.$message`
1                | false               | Defined              | -            | Defined              | `$java_alt_api_package.$java_outer_classname.$message`
1                | false               | Not defined          | Not defined  | Not defined          | `com.google.protos.$package.proto2api.$derived_outer_class.$message`
1                | false               | Not defined          | Not defined  | Defined              | `com.google.protos.$package.proto2api.$java_outer_classname.$message`
1                | false               | Not defined          | Defined      | Not defined          | `$java_package.proto2api.$derived_outer_class.$message`
1                | false               | Not defined          | Defined      | Defined              | `$java_package.proto2api.$java_outer_classname.$message`
2                | true                | -                    | Not defined  | -                    | `com.google.protos.$package.$message`
2                | true                | -                    | Defined      | -                    | `$java_package.$message`
2                | false               | -                    | Not defined  | Not defined          | `com.google.protos.$package.$derived_outer_class.$message`
2                | false               | -                    | Not defined  | Defined              | `com.google.protos.$package.$java_outer_classname.$message`
2                | false               | -                    | Defined      | Not defined          | `$java_package.$derived_outer_class.$message`
2                | false               | -                    | Defined      | Defined              | `$java_package.$java_outer_classname.$message`

**Legend**

*   \- means either setting or not setting the option will not change the
    generated full message name.
*   `$message` is the actual name of the proto message.
*   `$package` is the name of the proto package. This is the name specified by
    the `package` directive in the proto file, which is usually at the top of
    the file.
*   `$derived_outer_class` is a name generated from the proto file name.
    Generally it's computed by removing punctuation from the file name and
    converting it to CamelCase. For example, if the proto is `foo_bar.proto`,
    the `$derived_outer_class` value is `FooBar`.

    If the generated class name would be the same as one of the messages defined
    in the proto file, `derived_outer_class` has `OuterClass` appended to it.
    For example, if the proto is `foo_bar.proto` and contains a `FooBar`
    message, the `$derived_outer_class` value is `FooBarOuterClass`. The same is
    true when using the v1 API, whether or not the class name would be the same
    as one of the messages defined.

*   All other `$names` are the values of the corresponding proto2 file options
    defined in the proto file.

### Recommendation { #recommendation }

The recommended set of options to use is:

```proto
option java_api_version = 2;
option java_multiple_files = true;
```

With `java_multiple_files = true`, the generated Java class for each message
will be placed in a separate `.java` file. This makes it much easier to move
messages from one `.proto` file to another. There is also an outer Java class
generated for the `.proto` file itself. (The legend above explains how this
outer class name is generated.)

## Mutable API Message Names { #mutable-api-message-names }

The names for protos generated by the Java mutable API are outlined in the
following sections.

{{% alert title="Note" color="note" %}}
Java mutable API names will be generated only when the
`java_mutable_proto_library` target is built.
{{% /alert %}}

{{% alert title="Warning" color="warning" %}} Java
proto1 is deprecated. go/java-proto1-deprecation describes when proto1 API is
still generated. Users should avoid proto1 and use proto2 api.
{{% /alert %}}

### Proto2 Message Names { #proto2-message-names }

java_api_version | (java_multiple_files, java_multiple_files_mutable_package) | java_package | java_outer_classname | java_alt_api_package | Proto2 Mutable message name
:--------------: | :--------------------------------------------------------: | ------------ | -------------------- | -------------------- | ---------------------------
\-               | (true, defined)                                            | -            | -                    | -                    | `$java_multiple_files_mutable_package.$message`
1                | !(true, defined)                                           | Undefined    | Undefined            | Undefined            | `com.google.protos.$package.proto2api.Mutable$Filename.$message`
1                | !(true, defined)                                           | Undefined    | Undefined            | Defined              | `$java_alt_api_package.Mutable$Filename.$message`
1                | !(true, defined)                                           | Undefined    | Defined              | Undefined            | `com.google.protos.$package.proto2api.Mutable$java_outer_classname.$message`
1                | !(true, defined)                                           | Undefined    | Defined              | Defined              | `$java_alt_api_package.Mutable$java_outer_classname.$message`
1                | !(true, defined)                                           | Defined      | Undefined            | Undefined            | `$java_package.proto2api.Mutable$Filename.$message`
1                | !(true, defined)                                           | Defined      | Undefined            | Defined              | `$java_alt_api_package.Mutable$Filename.$message`
1                | !(true, defined)                                           | Defined      | Defined              | Undefined            | `$java_package.proto2api.Mutable$java_outer_classname.$message`
1                | !(true, defined)                                           | Defined      | Defined              | Defined              | `$java_alt_api_package.Mutable$java_outer_classname.$message`
2                | !(true, defined)                                           | Undefined    | Undefined            | -                    | `com.google.protos.$package.Mutable$Filename.$message`
2                | !(true, defined)                                           | Undefined    | Defined              | -                    | `com.google.protos.$package..Mutable$java_outer_classname.$message`
2                | !(true, defined)                                           | Defined      | Undefined            | -                    | `$java_package.Mutable$Filename.$message`
2                | !(true, defined)                                           | Defined      | Defined              | -                    | `$java_package.Mutable$java_outer_classname.$message`

**Legend**

*   \- means either setting or not setting the option will not change the
    generated full message name.
*   `$message` is the actual name of the proto message.
*   All other `$names` are the values of the corresponding proto2 file options
    defined in the proto file.

### Proto1 Message Names { #proto1-message-names }

{{% alert title="Warning" color="warning" %}} Java
proto1 is deprecated. go/java-proto1-deprecation describes when proto1 API is
still generated and describes its message names. Users should avoid proto1 and
use the proto2 api. {{% /alert %}}
